1. The resource was taken from my previous teaching materials for ‘A’ Level psychology adult education students (Jelfs, 2010). The original material was a section of a revision package and included a PowerPoint presentation, which would have been part of a face-to-face tutorial plus printed notes. In H810 the learning resource required the inclusion of diagrams and tables as well as images, so I therefore adapted the PowerPoint presentation to mainly include images and to keep the main body of the document as text and tables.

The resource had some accessibility features that were achieved by keeping the document Microsoft® Office Word based, thereby accessible for students using assistive technologies such as screen readers or voice controlled packages. I was then able to make the navigation of the text primarily through headings and styles. Headings can indicate sections and subsections in a long document and help any reader to understand different parts of the document and levels of importance. Students who use screen reading software such as JAWS can use the Document Map to navigate, which in turn helps the student to understand the content and to move around the document. If I had used direct formatting, which unfortunately I did on some occasions, then although I could make the text have the same visual effect it would not appear in the document map and any screen reading software would not have used it as a navigation tool. An added feature is that as a Word document a blind student could run the document through a Braille embossing printer to give a Braille written document.

Another accessibility advantage of using Word documents is that it allows students to increase the font size or to use the Zoom Feature to enlarge the text, so that visually impaired students can adapt the document to suit their needs. By setting the ‘Heading rows repeat’ in the tables this would allow for the font size to be increased but would keep the headings, which is a particularly useful if the table goes over two pages (Taylor and Colwell, 2010). I did not realise that I could do this feature before I created the resources, so this accessibility feature is not present, but I would endeavour to do that in the future. The PowerPoint presentation adhered to the Jisc TechDis Creating accessible presentations guidelines (undated) and the WC3 guidelines (2010) in that there was no unnecessary background colour, was of large font size and could easily be printed as slides or handouts. However, for Dyslexic students they may have preferred the use of dark coloured text on a light (not white) background (Dyslexia Style guide, undated).

The presentation could be given either in electronic or printed formats for blind and partially sighted students before the tutorial. Thus allowing the student to run the presentation through Braille software or to have it loaded on any portable device such as a laptop computer. The resource also included a written description of the PowerPoint presentation, once again allowing visually impaired students to have a document before a tutorial, which could then be used through screen reading software to describe the images. These images are necessary if a student wishes to use them as a psychological experiment, but if the student did not wish to use them then another experiment could be conducted. Therefore an alternative learning experience could be adapted for some students.
For comparison, with her permission, I am using Nicola Scull’s resource on Building robust searches (Scull, 2010). The reason I have selected this resource is because Nicola has also used a PowerPoint presentation and Word document description. Nicola’s resource was aimed at academic staff as part of a face-to-face staff development plan, so there were again similarities in that both of our resources were aimed at classroom-based adults and the materials adapted for online delivery. The objectives are also very similar in that for both resources students are being directed in how to complete an activity, develop skills and provide students with a greater understanding of appropriate subject strategies.
The design of Nicola’s resource again allows for print-disabled students (dyslexic, blind and visually impaired, Richardson 2006) to access the resources and make changes so that they are fully accessible. Where her resources differ and in fact improve on mine is that all the content is available in one document, whereas mine has some features that can only be accessed through Google Docs. Thus making mine less immediately accessible in that the student has to navigate away from the main resource. 
Nicola’s PowerPoint presentation has large amounts of text on each slide, thereby not conforming to the Jisc TechDis guidelines, but where she has used images these have been removed from the Word version and a written description has been inserted. This is an improvement on my resource which had a number of images that each needed a detailed description that was included in one of the Google Docs. Nicola did not use any audio or video, so that again improved the level of accessibility over my resource which did include an iTunes video and once again a student would need to navigate away from the original resource. In conclusion, I would assess that both Nicola’s and my resource had some accessibility features and that we would have achieved a more accessible resource if we had worked together, because we did not have the same inaccessible items and could learn from each other.

2. The evaluation framework I would ideally use would be holistic in nature where the learner needs are central to the evaluation (Kelly, Phipps and Swift, 2004). My ideal framework would include the four approaches identified in Activity 24.2, H810 i.e.
1. Testing with disabled users 
2. Testing by accessibility experts 
3. Assessing conformance to checklists/guidelines, including the use of automated checkers 
4. Testing with assistive technologies. 
Testing with disabled students would give me a better informed evaluation in that the end user could give feedback on their requirements, which as Seale (2006 p.87) says user-centred design places people with disabilities at the centre of the design process. The difficulties with this type of testing includes the time needed to recruit students with different types of disability and the need to make some financial contribution to the student’s input to the testing e.g. travel costs. Ideally I would also conduct usability testing with non-disabled students to ensure that by making things accessible to one group of users, I was not making it inaccessible to another group (Kelly et al, 2004 p 5; p 11;Cooper, Colwell and Jelfs 2007). As I am not accessibility expert my understanding of the problems facing disabled students is limited and I do not have access to such an expert. 

As a learning technologist I would be expected to have an awareness of assistive technologies (Seale, 2006) and it would be difficult to create accessible learning resources without some knowledge of technologies such as JAWS or BrowseAloud and how these tools interact with my resource. Therefore, due to restricted access to both disabled students and accessibility experts, I will focus my evaluation on assessing conformance and testing with assistive technologies.

The resource I produced was in Word, which is accessible in that it was navigable and could be enlarged or adapted to the user’s preferences including changing font size and/or colour backgrounds. However, when considering the Royal National Institute for the Blind’s (RNIB) suggestions on making print accessible I realise that I have included a number of incorrect features. The RNIB suggests that the document text size should be 12-14 pt, preferably 14 pt. My resources were primarily in Arial 10pt font which is too small, although the font could be classed as clear as it was not stylised, the font size itself does not adhere to the RNIB recommendations as it would need to be enlarged before any printing. Another point which made the resource less accessible was through using ‘bold’ when it was direct formatting.  This would not be helpful for visaully impaired or blind students as the text to speech software would not be able to use the additional features, which were present only for asthetic reasons and did not add to the content.  One of the recommendations that Taylor (2010) makes is that Word documents should be provided as RTF files because: 
• Some portable Braille notebooks can open RTF files but not Word documents
• Some students use other word-processing applications because they are more suitable for their specific needs
• RTF does not carry “macro” viruses which means students feel that it is safer to download
So, my resource would have been more accessible as an RTF file and I feel I could easily amend the resource by saving the Word file as RTF.
To continue my assessment with checklists and guidelines I used some automated checkers such as an image analyzer as I had a few images in my resource. I used Juicy Studio and its main findings were that there were no long descriptions for the URLs. Please see screen shots in Appendix. This could be amended for future resources. Automated checkers do have some useful features in checking that web sites conform to standards, but as Pernice and Neilsen (2001) state, even if a site is theoretically accessible because it follows the technical accessibility standards to the letter, it can still be very hard to use for people with disabilities. 
In my resource was the opportunity for students to view an iTunes video provided by the Open University and was free to download, although students would have to use iTunes. This could be restrictive if students did not wish to download iTunes, but as it was not an essential part of the course I did not feel it needed any alternative material. As Scull (2010) pointed out there is controversy about using iTunes: “The iTunes world is centralised, walled off. You are trapped in a single store, rather than being on the open marketplace." (Metro 2010). If I had iTunes as a major feature of the resource then I would have had to provide audio and visual support materials including captioning (Burgstahler, 2008; Colwell, Jelfs and Mallett, 2005), to enable all students to have access to the same learning outcome. 
Having used conformance tests guidelines, I realised that I agree with Thompson et al, (cited by Seale 2006 p95) that the problem with conformance tests are that without the human judgements it is difficult to understand the severity of an accessibility difficulty and there is the potential to create an inaccessible resource. My next decision was to use assistive technology and to do so I considered Read&Write Gold (http://www.texthelp.com/page.asp?pg_id=1266 (with the UK voices Emily and Daniel), as well as NonVisual Desktop Access (NVDA) and Job Access With Speech (JAWS).
I could not download NVDA on my computer and did not have access to Read&Write, but I did have access to the screen reader JAWS. This is a popular system for Microsoft Windows users and therefore often used by blind and other disabled students, so I ran JAWS through my resource and my findings are as follows:
• JAWS did not read the psychology ‘psi’ image of ψ on the first heading. This was unusual in that I had used the Word insert symbol, so why it was unread is unaccountable.
• In general, JAWS was able to navigate using my headings and styles. Where it had difficulties was when one heading 2 ‘You ask them’ where I might have changed the formatting rather than the style and JAWS was unable to read it as a heading.
• By putting the full URLs in the resource, these were read out by JAWS. It would have been preferable to put in a text link so that it was more meaningful. For example I could have told the student that the link was about an introduction to psychology and that it would take them to Apple.com or that the format of the resource they were being directed to was a Podcast.
• As stated earlier I did not markup the table headings, so JAWS did not repeat the table headings as it moved between table cells. It did tab through the cells, but I could improve the resource by marking up the table headings.
• In the final sections I did not use bullet points, but used lower case letters. This meant that JAWS read a) as arrgh.  I think that if I changed the letters to upper case A) then it might read it as ‘A parenthesis’.  In fact the a), b), c) was not identified as a list so I would need to find out the reason why it was not seen as a list.
• The PowerPoint presentation could only be read as a slide show and I would need to look at the help file for JAWS to find out why this happened.
In conclusion, the strengths of my resource was its use of headings as a navigation tool and its weaknesses was the over ambition of including too many external web resources.

3. The aim of the development of my resources was very pragmatic, in that I wanted all students to have access to accessible online materials and it was my responsibility to achieve a useable object. At the same time as an educationalist the UK legislation states that wherever possible reasonable adjustment should be make for disabled students to study and without discrimination (Disability Rights Commission, 2007; Equality Act, 2010).  There is also an assumption that electronic resources and online learning provides disabled students with a ‘level playing field’ (Burgstahler et al as cited in Seale, J. (2006) p. 23). However, there are barriers to the use of online delivery to students through the potential lack of access to software, hardware and connectivity. It then becomes clear that I would have a number of external drivers to create an accessible resource and this was not as easy as I first anticipated.

My original intention was to create a set of web resources and to have the resources embedded in a website, perhaps located as a Google or WordPress site. In fact I did start to create such sites, but found the time needed to learn how to input materials to the sites was greater than I anticipated. This is something I will give myself time to learn for future resources. Having looked at other students’ sites that have used Xerte, I wish I had had the time to attend Simon Ball’s tutorial on creating such sites, but I now have a log in for Xerte and again when time allows I will return to the tutorial session and attempt to make my resources accessible through Xerte. My aim had been to create an inclusive site, but instead I continued with my original materials and made then as accessible as possible. I felt this was justified because Word and RTF documents are accessible to a diverse number of disabled groups (Taylor and Colwell, 2010).

My intention was to work at the level of universal design through considering the needs of all students and anticipating and planning for student diversity (Seale, 2006), again often seen as a way of ‘levelling the playing field’. However conformance to standards and guidelines can discourage a number of staff from exploring the potential of online learning (Kelly et al pp.10) and I wanted to stretch myself within a safe exploratory environment of H810. Therefore I included a number of other resources within the Word document.  Although I have considered the Universal Design approach there is another approach of Personalisation where resources and interfaces are selected and adapted to meet the needs of the individual user in their own context. Paciello (as cited in Seale, 2006 p 89.) sees personalisation as the ‘Third Wave’ where the Web ensures accessibility for every user by adapting to the user’s preferences. From my understanding, the universal approach is the traditional interpretation of the W3C’s Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI), but the ‘one size fits all’ may not work and neither may personalisation if a student does not know how to access and benefit from them. For example if a student has never changed their browser settings, then they may not achieve the benefits that are embedded in the online provision. I would hope that in the future this might then lead to a further development where the two approaches meet and the student can choose from a pre-set number of options.

In my evaluation of the material I realise that checklists and guidelines such as W3C WAI are very attractive as they are easier to implement than a user-centred approach.  Kelly et al (2004) see this reliance on guidelines as counter-productive as it encourages developers to prioritise areas that are covered by the guidelines and encourages content accessibility rather than user-centred. I would agree with this notion and at the OU this conformity to guidelines is implemented through the technical testing department whose responsibility it is to ensure the quality assurance of the University’s web presence on different platforms etc.  Technical testing has no end user input, which is why experienced Human Computer Interaction (HCI) specialists in the Institute of Educational Technology carry out those types of studies.

Finally, by using assistive technologies such as JAWS I was able to have some understanding of the issues facing students. However, a large quantity of the practice literature focuses on people with little or no sight and those who are dyslexic. There has been less focus on people who are deaf, hearing impaired, have motor difficulties, physical impairments and mental health issues. Students who may be tired, fatigued, depressed or unable to sit at a computer for any length of time need alternatives to a totally online course. By embedding all resources online, there may be a number of disadvantaged students who would prefer the option to print out materials. This is where course materials in Word or RTF can be a bonus for some disabled students.