You would imagine a primary school would not have much in common with the crematorium next door but we are both tucked away at the back of an industrial estate, out the way of other people.  The pupils here are assessed as having social, emotional and behavioural disturbances (SEBD) requiring Special Educational Needs (SEN) provision despite national policy emphasising inclusion, Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act (2004).  It is hoped that pupils will return to mainstream education or alternative SEN provision but most do not.  Looking at a register from the last academic year I can see that nine pupils left for other SEBD placements and none went to a mainstream school.  Pupils commonly leave for an SEBD residential placement.  This is partly because some have extreme behaviour that cannot be managed at home and partly because several pupils are LAC (Looked After Children).  Unless otherwise stated the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act (2009) asserts that LAC pupils should be assumed to have additional support needs.  I certainly agree that not having a stable home or family support is an educational disadvantage.  As accommodation placements change, often so does the school placement and no single guardian oversees their needs with any kind of continuity.  Even in long-term placements there may be various staff changes in a unit or no guarantee of placement permanence from week to week.  Such disruption and uncertainty can result in adverse behaviour being exhibited or exacerbated and pupils may spend days or weeks out of school to ‘settle in’ to a new placement.  
Pupils in this primary school are often classed as ‘unavailable’ to access the curriculum because of attention and emotional difficulties e.g. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder or autism.  The resulting emotions and behaviours (which may be extreme) leave them unable to concentrate on, take in and process their learning (RCC Project, 2009, pg. S4).  Crisis behaviours would always need to be dealt with as current emergencies, but staff (RCC Project, 2009, pg.S10) and pupils (Greenview Learning Centre, 2011, pg1) are encouraged to be aware of triggers and signs of escalation in order to prevent crisis incidents.  Permanent staff are trained in Therapeutic Crisis Incident Management and pupils educated as part of the school’s PSHE (Personal, Social and Health Education) curriculum, as per the previous references.  Since one-to-one work with an educator is rare most pupils have to work in their class of six pupils.  They often find each other’s behaviours difficult to ignore and so antecedents to escalating distress are frequent.  Thus the emotions and behaviours experienced may directly inhibit learning and may also result in time out of class, away from learning.  This is true for both pupils experiencing distress and pupils who need time away from someone else’s distress.  Teachers decide who is to have time out of class.  
Several pupils have multiple diagnoses (from their educational psychologist, psychiatrist etc.) and many are assessed as having learning difficulties.  While each pupil has an Individual Education Plan prepared by their class teacher ensuring any known learning difficulties or weaknesses are supported, behavioural problems frequently overshadow other disabilities.  This is because behaviour may be an immediate safety concern, and dealing with behaviour takes pupil and staff time away from academic learning and testing.  Thus I imagine there will be some undiagnosed learning issues amongst pupils who do not engage well with staff and educational placements.  Behavioural problems may disguise learning and other difficulties (Cooper et.al., 1994).  Cooper also notes that “Circumstances that are conducive to the prevention of emotional and behavioural difficulties are also conducive to effective teaching and learning.” (pg.6). Therefore attending to behavioural or academic needs is likely to benefit both areas.  
Lack of pupil attendance at school is an issue mainly attributed to either chaotic/neglectful home life, or problem behaviour resulting in an exclusion from school on a temporary basis, or attending school on a part-time timetable.  It is noted that Glasgow City Council (GCC, 2012a pg4) prioritise finding alternative solutions to exclusions and emphasise that excluding LAC, or other children, for behaviour relating to their disability may be unlawful (Equality Act, 2010, section 13).  Pupils excluded for between five and ten days are only entitled to 2 hours of teaching at home per week (GCC, 2012a, pg.6)¹.  This minimal contact time means these pupils lack much access to education.  Head Teachers generally make decisions on temporary exclusions and Glasgow’s Executive Director of Education makes decisions on permanent exclusions.  Where teachers from the school cannot provide teaching at home for excluded pupils this would be supplied by the council’s Interrupted Learners Service, who also provide home tuition for pupil populations experiencing “extended disruption to education” (GCC, 2012b).   Accessed teaching time is an issue even within a typical school day as our pupils finish school half an hour earlier than those in mainstream establishments.  This is in part because the half hour lunch for pupils is fully staffed (by pupil support assistants and the senior management team) and structured as planned social learning with no free play opportunity and in part to accommodate teacher’s non-class contact time (McCrone, 2001, pg.5).  Implementing lunch as another learning opportunity is a constructive move but SEBD pupils may also benefit from spending that extra half hour in class at the end of the day.  Studies relating hours spent in school with academic success are somewhat mixed with The Pearson Foundation (2012, pg.1) relating less time spent in class with more time available to support pupils with learning difficulties and Baines (2007, pg.99) relating less time used wisely with more academic success.  As previously noted there are pupils who do not cope with full-time hours.  The number of these pupils may increase if the hours were to increase, and the number of crisis incidents may increase if more pupils are stressed by a longer school day (Pellissier, 2010, pg.2).  
There are three main accessibility problems in this establishment.  The overriding accessibility issue for the pupils is clearly behaviour difficulties, which directly affects their attendance and teaching time.   Learning difficulties also impact pupil’s ability to access their schooling. 
The school policy, ‘Use of Computers in the Classroom’, states that ICT “should be used to enhance teaching and learning across the curriculum.”  (Stuart, 2003a, pg.1).  This policy specifies activities and lists school resources to reinforce and develop skills in all areas including academic and PSHE.  Short, interactive activities are popular to keep pupils engaged and on-task.  Software often allows scores etc. to be produced and noted fairly to competitively motivate pupils who can compete with peers or the computer.  Some pupils able to work on the computer without direct support can be learning appropriately while staff are engaged in dealing with other pupil’s behavioural issues.  To this end teachers may have certain options available for quick access on class computers.  Unusually in this establishment, no anger management resources are specified but reference is made to teacher’s ICT folders which contain lists of further resources.  Using ICT to support learning and behaviour for all pupils appears to be established and is controlled by the teacher.  There is a marked gap in support when pupils are not physically attending.  This is perhaps related to the less robust ‘Internet in Classrooms Position Paper’ (Stuart, 2003b) which emphasises teacher access to the internet and limited pupil access.  It is notable that both policies restrict computer and internet use to the classroom.  There appears to be no such contact intended for pupils not in class, despite the distance barrier that could be overcome with such technology.  
Challenges to online education, should it become available to pupils from home, would include potential lack of parent/guardian support and lack of appropriate technology at home.  Many parents would be unable or unmotivated to become a home tutor, even on a temporary basis, for innumerable personal, social and family reasons and commitments.  SEBD pupils are also not always easy to work with or motivate (Munden and Arcelus, 2000, pg.107), and given the nature of these disabilities such pupils may need some face-to-face time with educators for live social and emotional modelling and support, despite the fact that some of these skills can be learned online (Nikopolous and Keenan, 2004, pg.1).  Giving or loaning expensive technology is likely to lead to some equipment being lost or broken, particularly if such equipment were to be the focus of certain violent or exuberant behaviours.  Not that this does not happen in the classroom.  Meeting with pupils or having them attend community resources such as a library (GCC, 2012b) may solve some hard and software issues.  Whether pupils who cannot attend school will manage to successfully attend a library is another challenge.  
Accessibility challenges for SEBD pupils are likely to remain.  These pupils seem mostly supported and protected in the current national and local educational climate.  It is up to staff who work directly with them to ensure that best practice is implemented and that available tools and support are made accessible.  Online access to education needs expanded.  